---
title: "PEPR TRACCS, LEAP-HCS 2025-2029"
collection: projects
type: "PEPR"
permalink: /projects/2025-PEPR
date: 2025-10-01
---

PEPR TRACCS, LEAP-HCS (2025-2029) "LEverAging differentiable Programming and online learning for Hybrid Climate Simulators"

Summary. 
======
<div style="text-align: justify"> 
Earth system models (ESMs) are widely used to study climate changes resulting from both
anthropogenic and natural perturbations. Over the past years, significant advances have been
made through the development of new numerical schemes, refined physical parameterizations,
and the use of increasingly powerful computers. Despite these advances, tuning ESMs to
accurately reproduce historical data remains largely a manual process, and persistent errors and
biases continue to challenge their accuracy. Reducing uncertainties in long-term climate
projections and accurately estimating the spread of climate simulations continue to be critical
challenges.
Recent advances in scientific machine learning, motivated the development of new, learning
based, methods for the design and calibration of ESMs. In this context, one promising way of
building climate models that are informed with Machine Learning (ML) is based on Differentiable
Programing (DP) paradigms. Differentiable programming englobes a set of techniques and
software tools for computing gradients/sensitivities of a model’s output, evaluated using a
computer program, with respect to the model’s input variables or parameters. These tools are
well-known among variational data assimilation practitioners, and recent work has proposed
differentiable programming as a promising bridge between modern machine learning techniques
and traditional scientific models.
DP methods allow for designing calibration methods that can be trained end-to-end (or online),
which, in turn, has the potential to unify and solve various challenges in climate modeling
including, model bias correction, parameter tuning and the design of subgrid-scale
parameterizations that are informed by observations. Furthermore, viewing online learning from
the point of view of variational data assimilation allows to use the same paradigm to solve both
model calibration problems, as well as, state estimation problems. The evidence supported by
using online learning on problems that include numerical models suggests that future numerical
models will be based on DP tools and informed with data. An early example of this paradigm was
developed by Google Research, where a full set of primitive equations is implemented in JAX,
resulting in a fully differentiable General Circulation Model (GCM).
However, the path to take between today's advances in combining DP with numerical models to
actual climate models that are used to produce useful information about climate change and its
impacts on humans and nature is a long-term project. To contribute to this future while making an
immediate impact on existing climate models, we propose investigating end-to-end calibration
methods for current climate models that lack DP capabilities. We focus on the ocean component
of climate models and aim to show that even without DP, carefully designed gradient
approximation techniques can be used on to solve online learning problems, leading as a result
to automated tuning methods that can be used for both parameter calibration and spinup
acceleration of ocean models. </div>

<div style="text-align: justify">
<strong> Partners:</strong>  IMT Atlantique, IGE
</div>
<div style="text-align: justify">
<strong> Funding body:</strong>  PEPR TRACCS
</div>

<div style="text-align: justify">
<strong> Role in the project:</strong>  Principal Investigator
</div>

